---
layout: post
title: "The Proof"
author: "Anamay Chaturvedi"
categories: [stories]
image: "/assets/images/Stories/Nature.jpeg"
excerpt: "A gripping fiction piece from the 3rd edition about a mathematician's discovery that challenges the foundations of logic itself."
---

**The Proof**

I am a mathematician.

As a mathematician, I am often asked what it is that I do. A rather
profound question indeed. Would that there existed an equally profound
answer. Or even a simple enough answer. You see, I don't really do
anything. Most mathematical research is conducted in tandem with
professorial duties. Hence, the majority of my time is taken up by
spewing the standard sophomore spiel to semi-interested second-years. A
little Newton and Leibnitz, some Cauchy and Euler to firm things up,
and, if I'm feeling particularly adventurous, a hint of Riemann.
Fascinating, isn't it?

When free from the drudgery of recall and relate, I try to think. Oh,
for a truly original idea, something that would shake up the foundations
of the mathematical edifice! That is the realm of the truly great. And
the truly young---mathematics, more than anything else, is called the
young man's game. The most revered prize in the field of mathematics,
the Fields Medal, is famously awarded only to a mathematician who has
made a remarkable discovery and is less than forty years of age.

Me, I am thirty-eight now. Nearing the point that someone decided was
all-important. What if I'd been born on the 29th of February? With a
birthday only once every four years, I would probably have been eligible
even after my death! Or if no one knew when was it that I was born?
They'd have to give me the benefit of the doubt.

Of course, I'd have to have a remarkable discovery too.

This is the story of such a discovery.

I believe it all started when the Upstart published a startlingly
original proof of the Four Colour Theorem. Although the theorem had been
proved before, rather recently, in fact, this proof outlined a bold new
approach that could be applied to a host of similar fields of enquiry.
There were even murmurs of the Fields committee having come to a
unanimous decision about the award.

I didn't leave my room for days.

When I finally met the world anew, my colleagues, my rivals, lesser men
all, murmured jealousy and despair, just within earshot. I could not
deny them, even to myself. It was jealousy, yes. But not for the paper,
no. It was for the Temptress---a young, dark-eyed beauty with raven
tresses. I had courted her, with decorum, of course, sobriety and
propriety ever the logician's watchword. But when has logic ever helped
to decrypt the mysteries of love?

And so it was that she fell for the Upstart, a brash man on the better
side of thirty, who took her dancing, of all things. I had long sought
to woo her with tales of my forays into the realms of the mathematical
arts---I showed her my papers. And then my magnum opus, my greatest
work. The vixen, she begged me to borrow it. I should have known
better---but the words of such a gorgeous creature were as wine to me,
the loneliness in my heart was as disorienting as an attack of
vertigo---it seemed logical to give her the script.

And she gave it to him.

When I finally got around to reading his proof, it was as I feared. The
braggart had taken the fruits of my labour, called them his own, and
used them to prove something as relatively trivial as the Four Colour
Theorem. My work was a treatise on mathematical structure---it was a
treatise on logic itself. The first example of work in the field I was
dealing with was Gödel's set of theorems on incompleteness in 1931. Put
loosely, they spoke of what it was and what was not possible to do in a
given mathematical structure---a framework of axioms. When I delved into
his work, I realised there was a gold mine to be exploited---the
consequences of his work were used to resolve the issue of whether it
was possible to axiomatise the entire field of mathematics. The hope was
that henceforth the mathematician's job would be as a technician, an
application of axioms and simple theorems to resolve the hardest of
problems. What Gödel did was to prove that this could never be. The
implication was that there would always be statements in any given
mathematical structure that could neither be proved nor disproved. And
that a mathematician remained in every sense of the word, an artist, one
who, more than anything else, had to let free his imagination.

It would take a creature as base as him, I suppose, to attempt to
profiteer from true beauty.

But I still had some hope---the Old Man.

There was one person in the entire department---in the entire
university, even, who seemed to understand me. He saw beauty in what I
did, and he believed in me when no one else had. His age was great---his
hair was white and his skin wrinkled. But his eyes were as sharp as a
man's ever were. To underestimate him was to imperil yourself---he had a
biting wit and an irascible tongue. His favourite anecdote was that of a
dinner party a long, long time ago, when Professor Wolfgang Pauli, the
great physicist, remarked sadly at a very poorly written manuscript
submitted by a junior---'Das ist nicht nur nicht richtig, es ist nicht
einmal falsch!'(Not only is that not right, but it is not even wrong!)
He used to speak admiringly of him. His idolatry of the physicist
extended even to his work---you could never catch the Old Man on a
mathematical error.

But a strict adherence to rigour cages the imagination, and so it was
that he had never produced an original paper on anything. He'd solved a
few problems, and in correcting other people's papers, there was no one
better. In this too, thus he was as Pauli---the mind of a true genius,
but a mind which had managed to manacle itself in its own constructs.

I had given him a copy of my manuscript---he could testify that the
Upstart had stolen my work. I felt as though there was hope yet.

But it was not to be.

I decided to go and visit him, so as to seek his counsel. As I reached
his rooms, I became aware of an unhealthy odour in the air---the
sickly-sweet smell of something slightly off. Seeing the door ajar, I
decided to walk in.

His living quarters appeared to be deserted. His dishes lay
unwashed---this accounted at least in part for the odour in the air. As
I entered his study, I became aware of a musty gloom; the shades were
drawn. In the dark, I made out a chair with its back to the door, where
I stood, a stool drawn untidily close to it---the carpet had been upset
on the floor. There was a huge desk at the far left---it was empty. I
crossed the room and pulled back the shades. The light from the sun
blinded me temporarily. I turned around, and as my vision cleared, I
leapt back in shock.

The Old Man sat on the sofa. His skin seemed even more lined, his eyes
sunken. He had never seemed older. However, it was his eyes that caused
me the greatest unease. For the first time since I'd known him, his eyes
were bleary and unfocused. As I neared him, I saw that he had soiled
himself. In all likelihood, he had been sitting here for several days.
Professor? Sir? Are you alright?"

It was as though I'd never spoken---there was no reaction. I could see
him breathing---but his utter expressionlessness and lack of response
seemed inhuman. I could see tear tracks in his face---which, again, was
as blank as a wet slate.

On the stool before him, there was my own manuscript, a register, and a
piece of paper. I thought I recognised his handwriting, and the piece of
paper seemed to be addressed to me; hence, despite everything, I picked
it up.

...the work ... it implies a flaw in any logical structure ... there is
no point in trying to understand ANYTHING. Man's progress is bound to
die---logic no longer has meaning ... NOTHING DOES...

His untidy scrawl was extremely hard to decipher---apart from the
handwriting itself, it was as though his hand kept veering off the page.
There were stray marks everywhere.

The manuscript on the stool made sense. But what was in the register? I
picked it up.

Within it---I recognised a listing of some of the theorems I'd proved.
Then the Old Man had tried to prove something---I couldn't make out in a
glance. He seemed to be interpreting the theorems in an even more
general manner than I'd meant them to. His handwriting started to
degenerate---it became more and more random, as though he could no
longer see the lines on the page. It seemed as though now he was trying
to disprove his earlier work---it made no sense.

I decided to postpone a more thorough appraisal of his work. I called an
ambulance---people came running up. I explained how I'd come across
him---I made no mention of the note or the proof.

Later, in my quarters, I tried to make sense of what I'd seen. According
to the Old Man's note, and what I saw, an implication of the work that I
did was to prove the pointlessness of the application of logic. Also,
the generality of the proof meant that it was no longer possible for a
rational person to complete a logical thought.

What was it that could shake a person's belief so strongly in existence?
It was as though the hubris of man had come a complete circle. We had
made great discoveries, yes. But a proof of a flaw in logic?

How could logic disprove logic? It implied an inconsistency in our
system of thought, in our understanding of reason, cause and effect. It
was as though there existed a huge blind spot, and as though
understanding the proof meant losing belief in sentient existence.

It was all too much for me. I had to read the proof.

With a feeling of dread and more than a little excitement, I started. I
had to admire the perfection of the professor's application of my
work---he truly understood the philosophy behind it. Three hours later,
at about the three-fourth mark, I cast my mind ahead and suddenly seemed
to understand what the professor suffered from. The register fell from
my hands---my vision seemed to flicker, then everything settled.

As long as I did not continue, I could hopefully delude myself. The
professor could have made an error. I could think of possible ways in
which the expected proof could fail. After an eternity of thought, I put
down the register. I didn't dare to continue.

Logic, you see, is an assumption. That is well-known to be true. What
the professor had found was a different construct that subsumed logic as
only one method of thought. It is hard to conceive---it requires an
incredible amount of imagination---it was as though the Old Man had been
saving up a life's worth of creative energy to do what he did. I know
this seems to be incredulous---but think of those times in which
something obvious lay undiscovered in front of your eyes, and it was as
though it were revealed by a swish of a magic wand. Mathematicians will
be reminded of the term an 'aha!' proof.

I thought of the implications of all I'd seen that day. After the Old
Man's breakdown, I knew I could no longer pursue Mathematics. I could no
longer work in Natural Philosophy---Physics, Chemistry, Biology---it was
all now fatal to me---my belief in logic was shaken. Another reason why
I couldn't do so was that if I were to start thinking about the proof
again and inadvertently complete it, I would share the professor's fate.

However, in my state of heartbreak, there was one thing I did
want---revenge on the Upstart. The possession of the deadly proof was
turning my mind; I wanted to be rid of it. I could achieve both ends at
one go.

I asked the Temptress to meet me once more. She was surprised I wanted
to meet her---the only reason she came was out of a sense of guilt, I
suppose. I told her that the Old Man had left behind an incredible
manuscript, that it was going to win me the prize. I opened a bottle of
wine and proceeded to become drunk. I had seen the glint of avarice in
her eyes; I merely facilitated what in her mind she had already
achieved.

I read Upstart's obituary a month later. 'Brilliant mind...elegant and
masterful mathematician...'

He had apparently hung himself. Suicide was a sure marker of mental
illness, was it not? People drew parallels to other great mathematicians
who had committed suicide or had suffered devastating psychiatric
disorders. Me? I hadn't laughed so hard in a very long time.

Unfortunately, the Old Man too passed away. The doctors said that it was
as though he had utterly and completely lost 'the will to live'.

I am no longer a mathematician. I now work as a small-time artist and
musician. It's much safer, you see.
